Create docs for ESM1.6 (#1242)
ACCESS-Hive/access-hive.github.io: docs/models/run_a_model/run_access-esm1p6.md

## Terminology

??? info "_Configuration_ and _experiment_ definitions"

    {%
        include-markdown "includes/terminology.md"
        start="<!--start:terminology-conf-vs-exp-->"
        end="<!--end:terminology-conf-vs-exp-->"
    %}

## Workflow manager, _payu_

{%
    include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
    start="<!--start:payu-about-->"
    end="<!--end:payu-about-->"
%}

??? info "_Payu_'s data organisation"

    {%
        include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
        start="<!--start:payu-organisation-->"
        end="<!--end:payu-organisation-->"
    %}
    For {{model}}, the standard output is saved in the file `access-esm1.6.out` and the standard error in `access-esm1.6.err`.

{%
    include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
    start="<!--start:access-payu-->"
    end="<!--end:access-payu-->"
%}

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Get {{ model }} configuration

Released configurations are developed, tested and supported by ACCESS-NRI and [CSIRO](https://www.csiro.au/en/research/environmental-impacts/climate-change/climate-science-centre).<br> 

> All released {{ model }} configurations are available from the [{{ model }} configs]({{github_configs}}) GitHub repository: `{{github_configs}}`.<br>

Reviewer: Hyperlink is sufficient; don't see a need to also include web address here.
```suggestion
All released {{ model }} configurations are available from the [{{ model }} configs]({{github_configs}}) GitHub repository.<br>
```

Author: I had that discussion with Felicity. People need to get the URL to give to payu clone. People who don't need the example, need 2 pieces of info:

- the URL of the configs repo
- the branch names

So we need the URL appearing in clear on the page and that's the best place for it.

> Supported configurations:

Reviewer: Overall comment re table below: Perhaps link to the longer description of each experiment that appears in the "ACCESS-ESM1.6" overview page in "ACCESS Models" section.

Author: I would need to add anchors to each configuration in the ACCESS-ESM page. It does not seem to add more information than the CMIP7 official description of the configuration so I'd rather not do it.

Reviewer: No worries! Then don't worry about it.

| Configuration | Reference | Branch name |
|---------------|-----------|-------------|

> | piControl     | [CMIP7 experiment setup](https://guidance.mipcvs.dev/CMIP7/Experiment_set_up_and_Forcings/picontrol/) | release-piControl |

Reviewer: Broken link. Suggested change:
```suggestion
| piControl     | [CMIP7 experiment setup](https://wcrp-cmip.github.io/cmip7-guidance/docs/CMIP7/Experiment_set_up_and_Forcings/picontrol/) | release-piControl |
```

> | esm-piControl | [CMIP7 experiment setup](https://guidance.mipcvs.dev/CMIP7/Experiment_set_up_and_Forcings/esm-picontrol/) | release-esm-piControl |

Reviewer: Broken link. Suggested change:

```suggestion
| esm-piControl | [CMIP7 experiment setup](https://wcrp-cmip.github.io/cmip7-guidance/docs/CMIP7/Experiment_set_up_and_Forcings/esm-picontrol/) | release-esm-piControl |
```

> | historical    | [CMIP7 experiment setup](https://guidance.mipcvs.dev/CMIP7/Experiment_set_up_and_Forcings/historical/) | release-historical |

Reviewer: Broken link. Suggested change:
```suggestion
| historical    | [CMIP7 experiment setup](https://wcrp-cmip.github.io/cmip7-guidance/docs/CMIP7/Experiment_set_up_and_Forcings/historical/) | release-historical |
```

> | esm-historical | [CMIP7 experiment setup](https://guidance.mipcvs.dev/CMIP7/Experiment_set_up_and_Forcings/esm-hist/) | release-esm-historical |

Reviewer: Broken link. Suggested change:

```suggestion
| esm-historical | [CMIP7 experiment setup](https://wcrp-cmip.github.io/cmip7-guidance/docs/CMIP7/Experiment_set_up_and_Forcings/esm-hist/) | release-esm-historical |
```

{%
    include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
    start="<!--start:get-config-payu-->"
    end="<!--end:get-config-payu-->"
%}

??? example "Example: Cloning a configuration"
    {%
        include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
        start="<!--start:payu-clone-example-->"
        end="<!--end:payu-clone-example-->"
    %}

??? info "Testing the configuration"
    {%
        include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
        start="<!--start:payu-test-config-->"
        end="<!--end:payu-test-config-->"
    %}

!!! tip
    If you want to restart your experiment from a specific restart point, please refer to [Start the run from a specific restart file](#specific-restart).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Run an experiment

{% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
    start="<!--start:payu-run-experiment-->"
    end="<!--end:payu-run-experiment-->"
%}

!!! warning

>     The individual run length defined in the configuration should be left at 1 year for {{model}} experiments in production in order to avoid errors. To run the model for longer than the default run length, conduct multiple runs. _Payu_ provides a range of options that allow you to control the length of the experiment as explained in this section.

Reviewer: The wording "experiments in production" threw me. Might also be confusing for a new user.

```suggestion
    The individual run length defined in the configuration should be left at 1 year for {{model}} experiments. To run the model for longer, conduct multiple runs as explained in this section.
```

>     The only exception is for testing purposes, in that case, it is possible to set the run length to be shorter than 1 year but other modifications are required as explained in [Run for less than one year](#shorter-runs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The only exception is for testing purposes. In that case, it is possible to set the run length to be shorter than 1 year, but other modifications are required as explained in [Run for less than one year](#shorter-runs).
```

??? tip "Identifying the run length for your experiment to ensure it is set to 1 year"

    In {{model}}, the run length is controlled by the `runtime` setting in the `config.yaml` file in the configuration. A 1-year run length is given by:

    ```yml
        runtime:
            years: 1
            months: 0
            days: 0
    ```

??? info "Minimise the number of PBS jobs used"

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
        start="<!--start:payu-optimise-PBS-->"
        end="<!--end:payu-optimise-PBS-->"
    %}

    !!! tip "Setting `walltime` in `config.yaml`"

>         The `walltime` must be set to be long enough that the PBS job can complete. {{model}} usually runs a single year in 60 minutes or less, but the `walltime` for a single model run is set to `2:30:00` out of an abundance of caution to make sure the model has time to run when there are occasional slower runs for unpredictable reasons. When setting `runspersub > 1` the `walltime` doesn't need to be a simple multiple of `2:30:00` because it is highly unlikely that there will be multiple anomalously slow runs per submit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        The `walltime` must be set to be long enough that the PBS job can complete. {{model}} runs a single model year in about 60 minutes. The `walltime` for a single model run, however, is set to `2:30:00` to allow sufficient time for an unexpectedly slow run. When `runspersub > 1`, the `walltime` need not be a multiple of `2:30:00`, as multiple unexpectedly slow runs within a single submission are highly unlikely.
```

       start="<!--start:payu-PBS-resources-->"
       end="<!--end:payu-PBS-resources-->"
    %}

??? info "Syncing output data"

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
       start="<!--start:payu-sync-->"
       end="<!--end:payu-sync-->"
    %}    

??? info "Pruning model restarts"

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
       start="<!--start:payu-restart-prune-->"
       end="<!--end:payu-restart-prune-->"
    %}    

??? info "Collation of ocean output files"

    !!! tip 
    
        Diagnostic and restart files produced by the ocean component, MOM, in {{model}} are not tiled. The collation is not needed and disabled by default in the {{model}} configurations.

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
       start="<!--start:payu-collate-->"
       end="<!--end:payu-collate-->"
    %}

??? info "_Payu_ options for advanced users"

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
       start="<!--start:payu-advance-options-->"
       end="<!--end:payu-advance-options-->"
    %}

    ??? info "Run for less than one year for testing purposes"
    
        #### Run for less than one year for testing purposes {: #shorter-runs .no-toc }

>         When debugging changes to a model, it is common to reduce the run length to minimise resource consumption and return faster feedback on changes. In order to run the model for a single month, the `runtime` can be changed to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        When debugging model changes, it is common to reduce the run length to minimise resource consumption and obtain faster feedback. To run the model for a single month, set runtime to
```

        
        ```yml
            runtime:
                years: 0
                months: 1
                days: 0
        ```

## Edit the model components' configuration

??? info "Edit the physics options"

    ### Edit the physics options

>     To modify the physics used by a component of {{model}} or the model variables saved in the output, you will need to modify the model component's configuration files. These are located inside a subfolder of the _control_ directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    To modify the physics of an {{model}} component or the variables saved to its output, edit the component's configuration files, located in a subfolder of the _control_ directory.
```

>     To change the input files used by a model (for example topography and atmospheric forcings), you will need to change the filepaths specified in the `config.yaml`. Changing input files may require additional modifications to the submodel configuration files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    To change the input files used by a model (e.g., topography and atmospheric forcings), update the corresponding file paths in the `config.yaml`. This may also require changes to the submodel configuration files.
```

??? info "Create a custom {{ model }} build"

    ### Create a custom {{ model }} build

>     All the executables needed to run {{ model }} are pre-built into independent configurations using _Spack_.<br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    All executables required to run {{ model }} are pre-built into independent configurations using _Spack_.<br>
```

>     To customise {{ model }}'s build (for example to run {{ model }} with changes in the source code of one of its component), refer to [Modify and build an ACCESS model's source code](/models/build_a_model/build_source_code#{{model|lower}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    To customise {{ model }}'s build (e.g., to incorporate source-code changes to a component), see [Modify and build an ACCESS model's source code](/models/build_a_model/build_source_code#{{model|lower}}0).
```

??? info "Controlling the diagnostics output by the model"

    ### Controlling the diagnostics output by the model

>     Selecting the variables to save from a simulation can be a balance between enabling future analysis and minimising storage requirements. The choice and frequency of variables saved by each model can be configured from within each submodel's _control_ directory. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Choosing which variables to save involves balancing future analysis needs against storage requirements. The variables saved, and their output frequency, can be configured in each submodel’s _control_ directory. 
```

>     Each submodel's _control_ directory contains _detailed_ and _standard_ presets for controlling the output, located in the `diagnostic_profiles` subdirectories (e.g. `~/{{model|lower}}/{{config_example}}/ice/diagnostic_profiles` for the sea ice submodel). The _CMIP7_ profiles request the variables used in the CMIP7 experiments and include a large number of variables at higher frequencies, while the _standard_ profiles restrict the output to variables more regularly used across the community. Details on the variables saved by each preset are available in [this Hive Forum topic](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/preset-output-profiles-for-esm1-5/3629).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Each submodel's _control_ directory contains _detailed_ and _standard_ output presets in its `diagnostic_profiles` subdirectory (e.g., `~/{{model|lower}}/{{config_example}}/ice/diagnostic_profiles` for the sea ice submodel). The _CMIP7_ profiles request variables used in CMIP7 experiments, with a larger number of variables at higher frequencies, while the standard profiles limit output to variables more commonly used across the community. Details of the variables saved by each preset are available in [this Hive Forum topic](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/preset-output-profiles-for-esm1-5/3629).
```

>     Selecting a preset output profile to use in a simulation can be done by pointing the following symbolic links to the desired profile:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Select a preset output profile by pointing the following symbolic links to the desired profile:
```

    
     * `STASHC` in the atmosphere _control_ directory.
     * `diag_table` in the ocean _control_ directory.
     * `ice_history.nml` in the ice _control_ directory.
    

>     For example, to select the _detailed_ output profile for the atmosphere:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For example, to select the _detailed_ output profile for the atmosphere submodel:
```

    <terminal-window>
        <terminal-line data="input">cd ~/{{model|lower}}/{{config_example}}/atmosphere</terminal-line>
        <terminal-line data="input">ln -sf diagnostic_profiles/STASHC_detailed STASHC</terminal-line>
    </terminal-window>

## Get Help

> If you have questions or need help regarding {{ model }}, consider creating a topic in the [Earth System Model category of the ACCESS-Hive Forum](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/c/esm/earth-system-model/72).<br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For questions or help with {{ model }}, post a topic in the Earth System Model category of the
[Earth System Model category of the ACCESS-Hive Forum](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/c/esm/earth-system-model/72).<br>
```

> For assistance on how to request help from ACCESS-NRI, follow the [guidelines on how to get help](/about/user_support/#still-need-help).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For assistance from ACCESS-NRI, follow the [guidelines on how to get help](/about/user_support/#still-need-help).
```

{% set model = "ACCESS-ESM1.6" %}
{% set model_type = "access-esm" %}
{% set github_configs = "https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-esm1.6-configs" %}
{% set release_notes = "https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-esm1-6-release-information/6755" %}

> {% set config_example = "release-preindustrial+concentrations" %}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{% set config_example = "release-piControl" %}
```

    Join the following projects by requesting membership on their respective NCI project pages:

    - [ki32](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/ki32/join)
    - [ki32_mosrs](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/ki32_mosrs/join)
{%
    include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
    start="<!--start:payu-projects-->"
    end="<!--end:payu-projects-->"
%}
    !!! tip
        To request membership for the _ki32_mosrs_ subproject, you need to:
        
        - already be member of the _ki32_ project
        {: style="list-style-type: disc"}
        - have a [MOSRS account](#mosrs-account)
        {: style="list-style-type: disc"}

    For more information on joining specific NCI projects, refer to [How to connect to a project](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/How+to+connect+to+a+project).

## Terminology

??? info "_Configuration_ and _experiment_ definitions"

    {%
        include-markdown "includes/terminology.md"
        start="<!--start:terminology-conf-vs-exp-->"
        end="<!--end:terminology-conf-vs-exp-->"
    %}

## Workflow manager, _payu_

{%
    include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
    start="<!--start:payu-about-->"
    end="<!--end:payu-about-->"
%}

> ??? info "_payu_'s data organisation"

Reviewer 2: For some reason the model log files section is formatting weirdly in the preview:

<img width="735" height="286" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/486c088d-3ce9-45e0-967f-de003ba64a97" />

    {%
        include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
        start="<!--start:payu-organisation-->"
        end="<!--end:payu-organisation-->"
    %}

>     For {{model}}, the standard output is saved in the file `access.out` and the standard error in `access.err`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    For {{model}}, the standard output is saved in the file `access-esm1.6.out` and the standard error in `access-esm1.6.err`.
```

All released {{ model }} configurations are available from the [{{ model }} configs]({{github_configs}}) GitHub repository: `{{github_configs}}`.<br>

Supported configurations:

| Configuration | Reference | Branch name |
|---------------|-----------|-------------|
| piControl     | [configuration doc](https://access-esm1p6-configs.access-hive.org.au/configs_experiments/configurations/piControl) | release-piControl |
| esm-piControl | [configuration doc](https://access-esm1p6-configs.access-hive.org.au/configs_experiments/configurations/esm-piControl) | release-esm-piControl |
| historical    | [configuration doc](https://access-esm1p6-configs.access-hive.org.au/configs_experiments/configurations/historical) | release-historical |
| esm-historical | [configuration doc](https://access-esm1p6-configs.access-hive.org.au/configs_experiments/configurations/esm-historical) | release-esm-historical |

{%
    include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
    start="<!--start:get-config-payu-->"
    end="<!--end:get-config-payu-->"
%}

> ??? exemple "Example: Cloning a configuration"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
??? example "Example: Cloning a configuration"
```

??? tip "Identifying `run_length` for your experiment to ensure it is set to 1 year"

    In {{model}}, `run_length` is controlled by the `runtime` setting in the `config.yaml` file in the configuration. A 1-year `run_length` is given by:

    ```yml
        runtime:
            years: 1
            months: 0
            days: 0
    ```
_payu_ provides two options to give you complete control over the length of the simulation:

- `runspersub` (in the `config.yaml` file) &rarr; the maximum number of runs for _payu_ for each PBS job submission
- `-n` (command line option) &rarr; sets the total number of runs to be performed, including runs per submission and through automated resubmissions of _payu_

`runspersub` allows you to maximise the number of years simulated within a single PBS job. For this, you also need to set `walltime`, the maximum time of every PBS job, accordingly. `-n` allows _payu_ to resubmit itself to continue the simulation in a subsequent PBS job.

!!! tip "Setting `walltime` in `config.yaml`"

>     The `walltime` must be set to be long enough that the PBS job can complete. The model usually runs a single year in 90 minutes or less, but the `walltime` for a single model run is set to `2:30:00` out of an abundance of caution to make sure the model has time to run when there are occasional slower runs for unpredictable reasons. When setting `runspersub > 1` the `walltime` doesn't need to be a simple multiple of `2:30:00` because it is highly unlikely that there will be multiple anomalously slow runs per submit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The `walltime` must be set to be long enough that the PBS job can complete. The model usually runs a single year in 60 minutes or less, but the `walltime` for a single model run is set to `2:30:00` out of an abundance of caution to make sure the model has time to run when there are occasional slower runs for unpredictable reasons. When setting `runspersub > 1` the `walltime` doesn't need to be a simple multiple of `2:30:00` because it is highly unlikely that there will be multiple anomalously slow runs per submit.
```

Might as well promote @manodeep's work!

          ```
          payu run -f -n 20
          ```
          This will submit subsequent jobs for the following years: 1 to 5, 6 to 10, 11 to 15, and 16 to 20, which is a total of 4 PBS jobs.
      
      - **Run 7 years of simulation with resubmission every 3 years**<br>
          To have a _total experiment length_ of 7 years with a 3-year resubmission cycle, set `runspersub` to `3` and `walltime` to `6:00:00`. Then, run the configuration with `-n` set to `7`:
          ```
          payu run -f -n 7
          ```
          This will submit subsequent jobs for the following years: 1 to 3, 4 to 6, and 7, which is a total of 3 PBS jobs.

??? info "Simulate more years for an existing experiment"

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
        start="<!--start:payu-continue-experiment-->"
        end="<!--end:payu-continue-experiment-->"
    %}

??? info "Re-run an experiment"

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
        start="<!--start:payu-re-run-experiment-->"
        end="<!--end:payu-re-run-experiment-->"
    %}

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Monitor {{ model }} runs

> {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"

Reviewer 3: There is another typo in the [inlcude file](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-Hive-Docs/blob/5b279b58d7fc10a87d75cc013fdc3fe34c3bc305/docs/includes/payu.md?plain=1#L310)

```suggestion
- ??? exemple "Example outputs from `payu status`"
+ ??? example "Example outputs from `payu status`"
```

   start="<!-- start:payu-modif-intro-->"
   end="<!--end:payu-modif-intro-->"
%}

??? info "Specify the restart file"

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
      start="<!--start:payu-restart-choice-->"
      end="<!--end:payu-restart-choice-->"
    %}

??? info "Specify the compute project and storage location"

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
       start="<!--start:payu-compute-storage-project-->"
       end="<!--end:payu-compute-storage-project-->"
    %}

??? info "Modify PBS resources"

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
       start="<!--start:payu-PBS-resources-->"
       end="<!--end:payu-PBS-resources-->"
    %}

??? info "Syncing output data"

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
       start="<!--start:payu-sync-->"
       end="<!--end:payu-sync-->"
    %}    

??? info "Pruning model restarts"

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
       start="<!--start:payu-restart-prune-->"
       end="<!--end:payu-restart-prune-->"
    %}    

??? info "Collation of ocean output files"

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
       start="<!--start:payu-collate-->"
       end="<!--end:payu-collate-->"

>     %}

Reviewer 2: Just remembered – ESM1.6 writes the ocean output using a single PE, and so the collation is disabled:
```yaml
# Collation
collate:
    enable: false

```

??? info "_payu_ options for advanced users"

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
       start="<!--start:payu-advance-options-->"
       end="<!--end:payu-advance-options-->"
    %}

    ??? info "Run for less than one year for testing purposes"
    
        #### Run for less than one year for testing purposes {: #shorter-runs .no-toc }

        When debugging changes to a model, it is common to reduce the `run_length` to minimise resource consumption and return faster feedback on changes. In order to run the model for a single month, the `runtime` can be changed to
        
        ```yml
            runtime:
                years: 0
                months: 1
                days: 0
        ```

>         With the default configuration settings, the sea ice component of {{ model }} will produce restart files only at the end of each year. For _payu_ to complete a run, you will need valid restart files created at the end of each run. This means the sea ice model configuration should be modified so that restart files are produced at the same frequency as the _runtime_ setting. To do this, change the `dumpfreq = 'y'` setting to `dumpfreq = 'm'` for monthly or `dumpfreq = 'd'` for daily  in the `cice_in.nml` configuration file, located in the `ice` subdirectory of the _control_ directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

This step isn't needed for ESM1.6

    
    Selecting a preset output profile to use in a simulation can be done by pointing the following symbolic links to the desired profile:
    
     * `STASHC` in the atmosphere _control_ directory.
     * `diag_table` in the ocean _control_ directory.
     * `ice_history.nml` in the ice _control_ directory.
    
    For example, to select the _detailed_ output profile for the atmosphere:
    <terminal-window>
        <terminal-line data="input">cd ~/access-esm/preindustrial+concentrations/atmosphere</terminal-line>
        <terminal-line data="input">ln -sf diagnostic_profiles/STASHC_detailed STASHC</terminal-line>
    </terminal-window>

## Get Help

If you have questions or need help regarding {{ model }}, consider creating a topic in the [Earth System Model category of the ACCESS-Hive Forum](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/c/esm/earth-system-model/72).<br>
For assistance on how to request help from ACCESS-NRI, follow the [guidelines on how to get help](/about/user_support/#still-need-help).

<custom-references>

> - [https://github.com/access-nri/access-esm1.5](https://github.com/access-nri/access-esm1.5)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-esm1.6](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-esm1.6)
```

Reviewer 2: Should we also have a link to the config docs?

- [https://opus.nci.org.au/](https://opus.nci.org.au/)

> - [https://github.com/coecms/esm-pre-industrial](https://github.com/coecms/esm-pre-industrial)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I think we can remove this one for ESM1.6

{% set model = "ACCESS-ESM1.6" %}
{% set model_type = "access-esm" %}
{% set github_configs = "https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-esm1.6-configs" %}
{% set release_notes = "https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-esm1-6-release-information/6755" %}
{% set config_example = "release-piControl" %}
{% set WG_project = "`lg87` project (ESM Working Group)" %}
{% set WG_project_code = "lg87" %}
{% set configs_docs = "https://access-esm1p6-configs.access-hive.org.au/" %}
[PBS job]: https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/4.+PBS+Jobs
[gadi]: https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/0.+Welcome+to+Gadi#id-0.WelcometoGadi-Overview
[payu]: https://github.com/payu-org/payu
[model components]: /models/access_models/access-esm/#model-components
[model configurations]: /models/access_models/access-esm/#access-esm16

<div class="text-card-group" markdown>

[:fontawesome-brands-github:{: class="twemoji icon-before-text"} {{ model }} configs docs]({{configs_docs}}){: class="text-card"}
[:notepad_spiral:{: class="twemoji icon-before-text"} Release notes]({{release_notes}}){: class="text-card"}
</div>

# Run {{ model }}

## About

> {{ model }} is a fully-coupled global climate model, combining  atmosphere, land, ocean, sea ice, ocean biogeochemistry and land biogeochemistry components. A description of the model and its components is available in the [{{ model }} overview][model configurations].

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{ model }} is a fully-coupled global earth system model, combining  atmosphere, land, ocean, sea ice, ocean biogeochemistry and land biogeochemistry components. A description of the model and its components is available in the [{{ model }} overview][model configurations].
```

?

> The instructions below outline how to run {{ model }} using ACCESS-NRI's software deployment pipeline, specifically designed to run on [NCI](https://nci.org.au/about-us/who-we-are)'s supercomputer [_Gadi_][gadi].

Reviewer 4: we normally use deployment to mean "build software and install in somewhere"

```suggestion
The instructions below outline how to run {{ model }} using ACCESS-NRI deployed software, specifically designed to run on [NCI](https://nci.org.au/about-us/who-we-are)'s supercomputer [_Gadi_][gadi].
```

    Note that ACCESS-NRI can only facilitate MOSRS account requests for users at ACCESS-NRI partner universities. If you are affiliated with another organisation, you will need to follow your institution's process for obtaining a MOSRS account.
 {: #mosrs-account}

    !!! warning
        The waiting time to obtain a MOSRS account can be up to 2 weeks.

- **Join NCI projects**<br>
    Join the following projects by requesting membership on their respective NCI project pages:

    - [ki32](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/ki32/join)
    - [ki32_mosrs](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/ki32_mosrs/join)
{%
    include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
    start="<!--start:payu-projects-->"
    end="<!--end:payu-projects-->"
%}
    !!! tip
        To request membership for the _ki32_mosrs_ subproject, you need to:
        
        - already be member of the _ki32_ project
        {: style="list-style-type: disc"}
        - have a [MOSRS account](#mosrs-account)
        {: style="list-style-type: disc"}

    For more information on joining specific NCI projects, refer to [How to connect to a project](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/How+to+connect+to+a+project).

> 

Reviewer 4: Should this section get moved to a template file? It's the same in esm1.5 and 1.6

| historical    | [CMIP7 experiment setup](https://guidance.mipcvs.dev/CMIP7/Experiment_set_up_and_Forcings/historical/) | release-historical |
| esm-historical | [CMIP7 experiment setup](https://guidance.mipcvs.dev/CMIP7/Experiment_set_up_and_Forcings/esm-hist/) | release-esm-historical |

{%
    include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
    start="<!--start:get-config-payu-->"
    end="<!--end:get-config-payu-->"
%}

??? example "Example: Cloning a configuration"
    {%
        include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
        start="<!--start:payu-clone-example-->"
        end="<!--end:payu-clone-example-->"
    %}

??? info "Testing the configuration"
    {%
        include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
        start="<!--start:payu-test-config-->"
        end="<!--end:payu-test-config-->"
    %}

!!! tip
    If you want to restart your experiment from a specific restart point, please refer to [Start the run from a specific restart file](#specific-restart).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Run an experiment

> 

Reviewer 4: This section is titled Run an experiment and then it focusses on runlength ? 

It doesn't say how to run the experiment

    The only exception is for testing purposes, in that case, it is possible to set the run length to be shorter than 1 year but other modifications are required as explained in [Run for less than one year](#shorter-runs)

??? tip "Identifying the run length for your experiment to ensure it is set to 1 year"

    In {{model}}, the run length is controlled by the `runtime` setting in the `config.yaml` file in the configuration. A 1-year run length is given by:

    ```yml
        runtime:
            years: 1
            months: 0
            days: 0
    ```
_Payu_ provides two options to give you complete control over the length of the simulation:

- `runspersub` (in the `config.yaml` file) &rarr; the maximum number of runs for _payu_ for each PBS job submission
- `-n` (command line option) &rarr; sets the total number of runs to be performed, including runs per submission and through automated resubmissions of _payu_

> `runspersub` allows you to maximise the number of years simulated within a single PBS job. For this, you also need to set `walltime`, the maximum time of every PBS job, accordingly. `-n` allows _payu_ to resubmit itself to continue the simulation in a subsequent PBS job.

Reviewer 5: This seems to be emphasising `runspersub` where I think `-n` is the critical information. `runspersub` is just about trying to optimise queuing time.

I've run a query against the telemetry and it seems queue time for the ESM1.6 experiments averages about 10%. So 10 minutes queueing for a 1 hour runtime.

I think we should look seriously at making the released configurations default to `runspersub:10`. So by default they would run 10 years at a time, which should reduce the queueing overhead to 1-2% (Ideally it would be 1% but the longer wall time mean the queue time is longer for a 12 hour wall time compared to a 2.5 hour wall time.

By defaulting to a more efficient 10 yrs/submit the `runspersub` docs could be simplified. It could just be "Double walltime for a doubled `runpersub`" and "consider reducing `walltime` during testing to reduce queue time" type messages.

Pinging @blimlim for input.

Reviewer 2: Increasing the `runspersub` and walltime seems like a good idea! I've just added an issue to the configurations repository [here](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-esm1.6-configs/issues/976).

What would be the best way to get an idea about the average queue time for the increased wall time?

Reviewer 5: > What would be the best way to get an idea about the average queue time for the increased wall time?

In the past I've just run some tests with a simple script that exits straight away, and just resubmitted a bunch of times with different settings and averaged the resulting numbers.

But the easiest is to make the change and then check with telemetry after the fact. I wouldn't worry too much about adding a specific number into the docs.

          To have a _total experiment length_ of 20 years with a 5-year resubmission cycle, set `runspersub` to `5` and `walltime` to `10:00:00`. Then, run the configuration with `-n` set to `20`:
          ```
          payu run -f -n 20
          ```
          This will submit subsequent jobs for the following years: 1 to 5, 6 to 10, 11 to 15, and 16 to 20, which is a total of 4 PBS jobs.
      
      - **Run 7 years of simulation with resubmission every 3 years**<br>
          To have a _total experiment length_ of 7 years with a 3-year resubmission cycle, set `runspersub` to `3` and `walltime` to `6:00:00`. Then, run the configuration with `-n` set to `7`:
          ```
          payu run -f -n 7
          ```
          This will submit subsequent jobs for the following years: 1 to 3, 4 to 6, and 7, which is a total of 3 PBS jobs.

??? info "Simulate more years for an existing experiment"

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
        start="<!--start:payu-continue-experiment-->"
        end="<!--end:payu-continue-experiment-->"
    %}

??? info "Re-run an experiment"

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"

>         start="<!--start:payu-re-run-experiment-->"

Reviewer 4: Does this section specifically not use `payu sweep --hard`? That would be the normal thing

    !!! tip 
    
        Diagnostic and restart files produced by the ocean component, MOM, in {{model}} are not tiled. The collation is not needed and disabled by default in the {{model}} configurations.

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
       start="<!--start:payu-collate-->"
       end="<!--end:payu-collate-->"
    %}

??? info "_Payu_ options for advanced users"

    {% include-markdown "includes/payu.md"
       start="<!--start:payu-advance-options-->"
       end="<!--end:payu-advance-options-->"
    %}

    ??? info "Run for less than one year for testing purposes"
    
        #### Run for less than one year for testing purposes {: #shorter-runs .no-toc }

        When debugging changes to a model, it is common to reduce the run length to minimise resource consumption and return faster feedback on changes. In order to run the model for a single month, the `runtime` can be changed to
        
        ```yml
            runtime:
                years: 0
                months: 1
                days: 0
        ```

## Edit the model components' configuration

??? info "Edit the physics options"

    ### Edit the physics options

>     To modify the physics used by a component of {{model}}, the input data or the model variables saved in the output, you will need to modify the model component's configuration files. These are located inside a subfolder of the _control_ directory, named according to the submodel's `name` specified in the `config.yaml` `submodels` section.

Reviewer 4: This section has mixed up modifying input data and configuration files when the need to be handled seperately.

input data files are listed in conflg.yaml, and are files stored in a central location on gadi and read by the model. folks could regenerate these and change config.yaml to change the inputs files read by the model

the models configuration files are text files stored in the git repository, with folders for each submodel

??? info "Create a custom {{ model }} build"

    ### Create a custom {{ model }} build
    All the executables needed to run {{ model }} are pre-built into independent configurations using _Spack_.<br>
    To customise {{ model }}'s build (for example to run {{ model }} with changes in the source code of one of its component), refer to [Modify and build an ACCESS model's source code](/models/build_a_model/build_source_code#{{model|lower}}).

??? info "Controlling the diagnostics output by the model"

    ### Controlling the diagnostics output by the model
    Selecting the variables to save from a simulation can be a balance between enabling future analysis and minimising storage requirements. The choice and frequency of variables saved by each model can be configured from within each submodel's _control_ directory. 
    

>     Each submodel's _control_ directory contains _detailed_ and _standard_ presets for controlling the output, located in the `diagnostic_profiles` subdirectories (e.g. `~/{{model|lower}}/{{config_example}}/ice/diagnostic_profiles` for the sea ice submodel). The _detailed_ profiles request a large number of variables at higher frequencies, while the _standard_ profiles restrict the output to variables more regularly used across the community. Details on the variables saved by each preset are available in [this Hive Forum topic](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/preset-output-profiles-for-esm1-5/3629).

Author: > should I add new lists for ESM1.6 to the config docs?

Eventually, but let's take note of this for after the release.
